Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
functional anatomy and the mechanics of breathing.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin respiratory physiology. Outline the functions of the respiratory
system and its functional anatomy.
The primary function of the respiratory system is gas exchange — the uptake of
oxygen and the elimination of carbon dioxide — but it has important non-respiratory
functions too, including acid-base regulation, defence,
metabolic and endocrine roles, and heat and water exchange.
Functionally, the airway is divided into two zones.
The conducting zone — the trachea, bronchi and bronchioles down to the terminal
bronchioles — conducts gas but takes no part in exchange,
and constitutes the anatomical dead space;
with each division the airways become more numerous but narrower,
so the total cross-sectional area increases greatly.
The respiratory zone — the respiratory bronchioles,
alveolar ducts and alveoli — is where exchange occurs,
across the vast alveolar surface, some seventy square metres,
with its very thin blood-gas barrier. The branching is dichotomous,
through some twenty-three generations.
So the respiratory system serves gas exchange and non-respiratory functions,
and is arranged as a conducting zone — the dead space that conveys gas — and a
respiratory zone of alveoli where exchange occurs across a large, thin surface;
the airways branching through many generations with a rapidly increasing total
cross-section, an anatomy adapted to ventilation and exchange.
Describe the respiratory muscles and their actions.
Breathing is produced by the respiratory muscles,
which act on the chest wall to change the volume of the thorax,
with inspiration being normally active and expiration normally passive.
The principal muscle of inspiration is the diaphragm,
the dome-shaped muscle separating thorax from abdomen,
supplied by the phrenic nerves from cervical roots three to five; on contracting,
it descends, increasing the vertical dimension of the thorax and accounting for
most of quiet inspiration.
The external intercostal muscles assist,
raising and rotating the ribs to increase the cross-sectional dimensions — the
bucket-handle and pump-handle movements. In quiet breathing, expiration is passive,
driven by the elastic recoil of the lungs and chest wall.
When breathing is increased, as in exercise or disease,
the accessory muscles of inspiration — the sternocleidomastoid and scalenes — are
recruited, and expiration becomes active,
using the abdominal muscles and the internal intercostals.
So inspiration is driven chiefly by the diaphragm,
assisted by the external intercostals, while quiet expiration is passive recoil;
in increased breathing the accessory muscles aid inspiration and the abdominal
muscles make expiration active — the muscles changing thoracic volume to drive
ventilation, their impairment being important in anaesthesia.
Describe the pleura and the intrapleural pressure.
The pleura is the serous membrane investing the lungs,
with two layers — the visceral, on the lung surface, and the parietal,
lining the chest wall — separated by a thin film of pleural fluid in the pleural
space; this coupling allows the lung to follow the chest wall while sliding freely.
The pressure within this space, the intrapleural pressure,
is crucial to the mechanics of breathing,
and is normally subatmospheric — negative — throughout the breathing cycle.
This negativity arises from the opposing elastic tendencies of the lung and chest
wall: the lung tends to recoil inward and collapse,
while the chest wall tends to spring outward,
and the two pull against each other across the pleural space,
generating a negative pressure of around minus five centimetres of water at the end
of a quiet expiration, becoming more negative — around minus eight — during
inspiration.
This negative pressure holds the lung expanded against its recoil.
So the pleura couples the lung to the chest wall via a thin fluid film,
and the intrapleural pressure is normally negative — created by the opposing
recoils of lung and chest wall — holding the lung expanded and becoming more
negative in inspiration; its loss, as in a pneumothorax,
allowing the lung to collapse.
Describe the mechanics of a quiet breath, in terms of the pressures involved.
A quiet breath can be understood through the changing pressures that drive air in
and out, following the principle that air flows down a pressure gradient between
the atmosphere and the alveoli.
At the end of a quiet expiration, the system is at rest: there is no airflow,
the alveolar pressure equals atmospheric,
and the intrapleural pressure is about minus five.
On inspiration, the inspiratory muscles contract and enlarge the thorax;
this makes the intrapleural pressure more negative,
which is transmitted to expand the alveoli,
lowering the alveolar pressure below atmospheric,
so air flows in down the gradient until the alveolar pressure returns to
atmospheric at end-inspiration, the lung now larger and the intrapleural pressure
more negative.
On expiration, the muscles relax, and the elastic recoil of the lung raises the
alveolar pressure above atmospheric, so air flows out until equilibrium is restored.
The transpulmonary pressure — the difference between alveolar and intrapleural
pressure — is the distending pressure of the lung.
So a quiet breath is driven by pressure gradients:
inspiration makes the intrapleural pressure more negative,
lowering alveolar pressure to draw air in,
while expiratory recoil raises alveolar pressure to expel it — the transpulmonary
pressure distending the lung, a cycle of pressure changes producing airflow.
What is meant by the elastic recoil of the lung,
and why does the lung tend to collapse?
The elastic recoil of the lung is its inherent tendency, when stretched,
to return to its smaller resting volume — in effect,
its tendency to collapse — and it is a fundamental property determining the
mechanics of breathing. It arises from two sources.
The first is the elastic tissue of the lung — the elastin and collagen fibres of
its structure — which, like a stretched spring,
store energy when the lung is inflated and recoil when allowed.
The second, and quantitatively the larger,
is the surface tension at the air-liquid interface lining the alveoli:
the liquid film tends to contract to minimise its surface area,
generating a force that tends to collapse the alveoli.
Together these give the lung a strong tendency to recoil inward,
which is what the negative intrapleural pressure opposes to keep the lung expanded;
it is also what drives passive expiration. The collapsing tendency of surface
tension is greatly reduced by surfactant.
So the elastic recoil of the lung — its tendency to collapse — arises from its
elastic tissue and, more importantly, from alveolar surface tension;
it is opposed by the negative intrapleural pressure that holds the lung expanded,
and it drives passive expiration, with surfactant moderating the surface-tension
component.
Explain how surface tension and the law of Laplace relate to alveolar stability.
The surface tension lining the alveoli creates, by the law of Laplace,
a pressure tending to collapse them,
and understanding this explains why surfactant is essential.
The law of Laplace, applied to a sphere such as an alveolus,
states that the pressure tending to collapse it equals twice the surface tension
divided by the radius. Two consequences follow.
First, the smaller the alveolus — the smaller the radius — the greater the
collapsing pressure for a given surface tension;
so small alveoli would tend to empty into larger ones,
and the lung would be unstable.
Second, the high surface tension of a plain liquid interface would make the lung
very stiff and prone to collapse.
Surfactant prevents this: by lowering the surface tension,
and — crucially — by lowering it more in smaller alveoli,
where the surfactant molecules are more concentrated,
it equalises the collapsing pressures across alveoli of different sizes,
stabilising them and preventing the small from emptying into the large.
So by Laplace's law the collapsing pressure of an alveolus is twice the surface
tension over the radius, so smaller alveoli would tend to collapse into larger and
the lung be unstable; surfactant prevents this by lowering surface tension,
and more so in smaller alveoli, equalising the pressures and stabilising the
alveoli — the basis of alveolar stability.
Describe surfactant — its nature, source and functions.
Pulmonary surfactant is a surface-active material lining the alveoli that is
essential to normal lung mechanics,
reducing the surface tension at the air-liquid interface.
It is a complex of lipids and proteins,
the principal active component being the phospholipid
dipalmitoyl-phosphatidylcholine, together with specific surfactant proteins that
aid its function and spreading.
It is synthesised and secreted by the type two alveolar epithelial cells,
the pneumocytes, and is turned over continuously.
It has several important functions.
By lowering the surface tension, it reduces the elastic recoil due to surface
tension, so increasing lung compliance and reducing the work of breathing.
By lowering surface tension more in smaller alveoli,
it stabilises alveoli of different sizes, preventing collapse,
as explained by Laplace. It reduces the tendency for fluid to be drawn into the
alveoli, helping to keep them dry.
And the surfactant proteins have a role in defence.
So surfactant is a lipoprotein, chiefly dipalmitoyl-phosphatidylcholine,
made by the type two pneumocytes, that lowers alveolar surface tension — increasing
compliance, stabilising alveoli against collapse, and helping keep them dry;
its deficiency, as in the neonatal respiratory distress syndrome, causing stiff,
collapsing lungs.
What is the relevance of respiratory mechanics to anaesthesia?
Respiratory mechanics is fundamental to anaesthesia,
because anaesthesia profoundly alters them and because we so often take over the
work of breathing.
Anaesthesia and the supine position reduce the functional residual capacity and
promote collapse of the dependent lung — atelectasis — impairing gas exchange.
Anaesthetic agents and neuromuscular blockade abolish the activity of the
respiratory muscles, so that ventilation must be supported or controlled,
and the diaphragm's altered position affects the distribution of ventilation.
Mechanical ventilation reverses the normal pressure relationships,
applying positive rather than negative pressure,
with consequences for the circulation and for the lung.
Understanding compliance, recoil and surface tension underlies the use of positive
end-expiratory pressure to prevent collapse,
and the recognition and management of conditions such as pneumothorax and
surfactant deficiency.
So respiratory mechanics is central to anaesthesia:
anaesthesia reduces functional residual capacity and causes atelectasis,
abolishes respiratory muscle activity requiring ventilatory support,
and reverses the normal pressures with positive-pressure ventilation — the
understanding of recoil, compliance and surface tension guiding the prevention of
collapse and the management of mechanical problems,
making mechanics a daily concern.
Pull it together: how does the interplay of lung and chest wall produce breathing?
I would draw it together around the lung and chest wall as an elastically coupled
system, whose opposing recoils, acted on by the respiratory muscles,
produce ventilation.
At rest, at the functional residual capacity,
the inward recoil of the lung exactly balances the outward recoil of the chest
wall, and the intrapleural pressure between them is negative,
holding the lung expanded.
Inspiration is active: the diaphragm and external intercostals enlarge the thorax,
making the intrapleural pressure more negative,
expanding the alveoli and lowering their pressure so that air flows in.
Expiration is normally passive: the muscles relax and the elastic recoil of the
lung — from its tissue and its surface tension,
the latter moderated by surfactant — returns the system to rest, expelling air.
The transpulmonary pressure distends the lung against its recoil throughout.
So breathing arises from the elastically coupled lung and chest wall,
balanced at the functional residual capacity by their opposing recoils across the
negative intrapleural pressure; the inspiratory muscles enlarge the thorax to draw
air in, and elastic recoil, moderated by surfactant,
expels it — an interplay of muscle and elastic forces that anaesthesia profoundly
disturbs.
Describe the compliance of the chest wall and of the total respiratory system.
The respiratory system comprises the lung and the chest wall in series,
each with its own elastic properties,
and the behaviour of the whole depends on the combination of the two.
The chest wall, like the lung, is elastic, but its resting tendency is opposite:
left to itself, the chest wall tends to spring outward to a larger volume,
whereas the lung tends to recoil inward and collapse.
At the functional residual capacity,
these opposing recoils are equal and opposite and balance,
which is what sets the resting volume.
Because the two elastances act in series, their compliances combine reciprocally:
the reciprocal of the total compliance equals the sum of the reciprocals of the
lung and chest-wall compliances, so the total respiratory system is stiffer — less
compliant — than either component alone.
The chest-wall compliance is reduced by obesity,
by abnormalities such as kyphoscoliosis, and by raised abdominal pressure.
So the chest wall is elastic with an outward resting recoil,
opposite to the lung's inward recoil,
the two balancing at the functional residual capacity;
their compliances combine reciprocally,
so the whole system is less compliant than either alone,
and the chest-wall component is reduced by obesity,
deformity and raised abdominal pressure — the combined elastic behaviour
determining the mechanics.
Describe the effect of body position on the mechanics of breathing.
Body position has marked effects on the mechanics of breathing,
principally through its effect on the diaphragm and the functional residual
capacity, which is highly relevant to anaesthesia.
In the upright position, gravity pulls the abdominal contents down,
away from the diaphragm, so the functional residual capacity is greatest and the
diaphragm sits low.
On lying supine, the abdominal contents push the diaphragm upward into the thorax,
reducing the functional residual capacity substantially;
this is worsened by anaesthesia and paralysis.
The Trendelenburg, or head-down, position pushes the diaphragm up further,
reducing the functional residual capacity more and increasing the work of breathing
and the tendency to collapse and to ventilation-perfusion mismatch.
The lateral position has differing effects on the two lungs.
Obesity and pregnancy exaggerate the reduction in functional residual capacity in
the supine and head-down positions.
So body position affects the mechanics chiefly through the diaphragm and functional
residual capacity: upright gives the largest functional residual capacity,
supine and especially head-down positions raise the diaphragm and reduce it —
exaggerated by obesity, pregnancy, anaesthesia and paralysis — increasing the work
of breathing and the tendency to collapse,
considerations central to patient positioning under anaesthesia.
Describe the alveolus and the structure of the blood-gas barrier.
The alveolus is the site of gas exchange, and its structure,
and that of the blood-gas barrier across which gases diffuse,
is exquisitely adapted to make diffusion rapid and efficient,
in accordance with Fick's law.
There are some three hundred million alveoli,
giving a vast total surface area of around seventy square metres.
The alveolar wall is lined by epithelium of two cell types:
the type one pneumocytes, flat, thin cells that cover most of the surface and
across which gas diffusion occurs; and the type two pneumocytes,
more numerous but covering less area, which are cuboidal, secrete surfactant,
and serve as the progenitor cells that can divide to replace the type one cells
after injury.
The blood-gas barrier, across which gas diffuses,
is extremely thin — less than a micrometre — comprising the thin type one
epithelial cell, a shared basement membrane, and the capillary endothelial cell.
So the alveolus presents a vast surface of some seventy square metres,
lined by thin type one pneumocytes for gas exchange and surfactant-secreting,
regenerative type two pneumocytes; and the blood-gas barrier — type one cell,
basement membrane and endothelium — is less than a micrometre thick,
a structure minimising diffusion distance and maximising area for efficient gas
exchange.
Describe the upper airway and the maintenance of its patency.
The upper airway — the nose, pharynx and larynx — conducts air to the lower airway,
conditions it, and protects it, and the maintenance of its patency is a critical
concern in anaesthesia because it is readily lost.
The nose warms, humidifies and filters the air.
The pharynx is a shared passage for air and food, and, lacking rigid support,
it depends on the tone of the pharyngeal dilator muscles to stay open;
the larynx guards the entrance to the trachea and provides the protective reflexes
of cough and laryngospasm and the function of phonation.
The patency of the pharynx is actively maintained by the tone of its dilator
muscles, in particular acting on the tongue and soft palate;
this tone is reduced by sleep, by sedatives and anaesthetic agents,
and by neuromuscular blockade, so that the airway tends to obstruct,
the tongue and soft tissues falling back — the basis of airway obstruction under
anaesthesia and in obstructive sleep apnoea.
So the upper airway conducts, conditions and protects,
the pharynx depending on active dilator muscle tone to remain patent;
that tone is reduced by anaesthesia, sedation and sleep,
causing obstruction — making the maintenance of the airway,
by positioning and airway devices, a fundamental anaesthetic skill.
Describe the effect of anaesthesia and paralysis on the functional residual
capacity and the diaphragm.
The induction of general anaesthesia produces a prompt and substantial reduction in
the functional residual capacity, by several hundred millilitres,
which is central to the impairment of oxygenation under anaesthesia,
and it results from changes in the chest wall, the diaphragm and lung volume.
The loss of the tone of the inspiratory muscles, including the diaphragm,
and a change in the balance of forces on the chest wall,
allow the functional residual capacity to fall; the supine position adds to this.
The diaphragm, losing its tone and, with paralysis, becoming flaccid,
is displaced upward by the abdominal contents, particularly its dependent parts.
The fall in functional residual capacity allows airway closure and collapse of the
dependent lung — atelectasis — which develops within minutes of induction and
creates shunt, impairing oxygenation.
These changes are countered by positive end-expiratory pressure,
recruitment manoeuvres and adequate inspired oxygen,
and by pre-oxygenation before induction.
So anaesthesia and paralysis reduce the functional residual capacity by abolishing
inspiratory muscle tone and allowing the diaphragm to be displaced upward,
causing airway closure and atelectasis with shunt and impaired oxygenation —
changes developing within minutes, countered by pre-oxygenation,
positive end-expiratory pressure and recruitment,
and central to anaesthetic respiratory management.
Describe the physiology of a pneumothorax.
A pneumothorax is the presence of air in the pleural space,
which abolishes the normal negative intrapleural pressure that holds the lung
expanded, allowing the lung to collapse under its own elastic recoil — a direct
consequence of the mechanics we have discussed.
Normally the intrapleural pressure is negative,
the lung being held expanded against its recoil by the coupling across the pleura.
If air enters the pleural space — from the lung,
the chest wall or spontaneously — the pleural pressure rises towards atmospheric,
the coupling is lost, and the lung recoils inward and collapses to a degree
depending on the volume of air, impairing ventilation of that lung.
A particularly dangerous form is the tension pneumothorax,
in which a valve-like defect allows air to enter the pleural space on inspiration
but not to leave, so that pressure progressively builds up;
this not only collapses the lung but pushes the mediastinum to the opposite side,
compressing the other lung and, critically, impeding venous return to the heart,
causing cardiovascular collapse — a life-threatening emergency requiring immediate
decompression.
So a pneumothorax is air in the pleural space abolishing the negative pressure,
so the lung collapses under its recoil; a tension pneumothorax,
with a one-way valve, progressively raises pressure, collapsing the lung,
shifting the mediastinum and impeding venous return — a lethal emergency,
and a recognised risk of ventilation and of central procedures in anaesthesia.
Describe how the lungs are divided anatomically into lobes and segments.
The lungs are divided anatomically into lobes and then into bronchopulmonary
segments, a structure of practical importance for localising disease and for
procedures.
The right lung has three lobes — upper,
middle and lower — separated by the oblique and horizontal fissures,
while the left lung has two — upper and lower — separated by an oblique fissure,
the left being smaller to accommodate the heart,
with the lingula of the upper lobe corresponding to the right middle lobe.
Each lobe is supplied by a lobar bronchus,
and is further divided into bronchopulmonary segments,
each supplied by a segmental bronchus and its own segmental artery — about ten on
the right and somewhat fewer, with some fusion, on the left.
Each bronchopulmonary segment is a functionally and surgically discrete unit,
which can be removed individually. The airways branch in a dichotomous,
increasingly numerous pattern from the main bronchi down to the alveoli.
So the right lung has three lobes and the left two, divided by fissures,
each lobe supplied by a lobar bronchus and subdivided into bronchopulmonary
segments — discrete units each with its own segmental bronchus and artery;
an anatomical organisation important for localising disease, for bronchoscopy,
and for segmental surgical resection.
Summarise how anaesthesia disturbs the mechanics of breathing.
I would summarise it as anaesthesia disturbing nearly every element of the
mechanics we have considered, with the common consequence of impaired oxygenation,
which the anaesthetist must anticipate and counter.
Anaesthesia and the supine position reduce the functional residual capacity by
abolishing muscle tone and displacing the diaphragm,
moving the lung to a less favourable part of its compliance curve and promoting
airway closure and atelectasis with shunt.
It abolishes the activity of the respiratory muscles,
so ventilation must be supported or controlled,
reversing the normal negative-pressure breathing into positive-pressure
ventilation, with its own effects on the lung and circulation.
It reduces the tone of the upper airway, causing obstruction.
It may provoke bronchospasm and increases dead space,
and it impairs the lung's defences.
These changes are countered by pre-oxygenation,
by positive end-expiratory pressure and recruitment to restore lung volume,
by careful airway management, and by appropriate ventilation.
So anaesthesia disturbs the mechanics by reducing functional residual capacity and
causing atelectasis and shunt, abolishing respiratory muscle activity and reversing
the breathing pressures, reducing airway tone and impairing defences — a
constellation impairing oxygenation that pre-oxygenation,
positive end-expiratory pressure, recruitment and good airway and ventilatory
management are designed to counter,
the daily application of respiratory mechanics in anaesthesia.
Describe the mechanics of forced breathing and the recruitment of accessory muscles.
Forced breathing, as in exercise or respiratory distress,
differs from quiet breathing in recruiting additional muscles and in making
expiration active, increasing the volume and rate of airflow at the cost of greater
work.
In forced inspiration, beyond the diaphragm and external intercostals,
the accessory muscles of inspiration are recruited — chiefly the
sternocleidomastoids, which raise the sternum, and the scalenes,
which raise the upper ribs, together with the pectoral and other muscles when fixed
by the arms — producing a greater and more rapid expansion of the thorax.
Expiration, passive in quiet breathing, becomes active:
the abdominal muscles contract, raising the intra-abdominal pressure and forcing
the diaphragm upward, while the internal intercostals pull the ribs down,
together rapidly reducing the thoracic volume and raising the pleural pressure
above atmospheric to drive a forceful, rapid expiration.
This active expiration is what produces the positive pleural pressures responsible
for dynamic airway compression.
So forced breathing recruits the accessory inspiratory muscles —
sternocleidomastoids and scalenes — for greater inspiration,
and makes expiration active through the abdominal and internal intercostal muscles,
raising pleural pressure to drive rapid expiration;
a pattern of greater airflow and work seen in exercise and distress,
and a clinical sign of respiratory difficulty.
Describe the diaphragm's zone of apposition and how it generates inspiration.
The diaphragm is the principal muscle of inspiration,
and the way it acts on the chest wall and abdomen is more subtle than simple
descent, involving the zone of apposition,
an understanding that explains its efficiency and its impairment.
The diaphragm is a dome, with its central tendon at the top and its muscular fibres
running down to insert on the lower ribs and lumbar vertebrae; the lower,
peripheral part of the diaphragm lies directly against the inner surface of the
lower rib cage, separated from it only by the pleural space — this region is the
zone of apposition.
When the diaphragm contracts, it acts in two ways: it descends,
pushing down the abdominal contents and increasing the vertical dimension of the
thorax; and, through the zone of apposition,
it lifts and expands the lower rib cage,
both by its direct pull and because the rise in abdominal pressure is transmitted
across the apposed area to push the ribs outward.
The zone of apposition is reduced when the lung is hyperinflated, as in emphysema,
flattening the diaphragm and impairing its action.
So the diaphragm generates inspiration both by descending to increase the vertical
thoracic dimension and, through the zone of apposition against the lower rib cage,
by expanding the rib cage; hyperinflation flattens it and reduces this zone,
impairing its efficiency — explaining the respiratory difficulty of the
hyperinflated patient.
Describe respiratory muscle fatigue.
Respiratory muscle fatigue is the state in which the respiratory muscles,
like any skeletal muscle, become unable to sustain the required force or work,
and it is an important cause of ventilatory failure,
occurring when the load on the muscles exceeds their capacity.
The respiratory muscles must work continuously,
and their capacity depends on their strength,
their energy supply — the blood flow and oxygen delivery — and their efficiency.
Fatigue develops when the work of breathing is increased — by stiff lungs,
high airway resistance or hyperinflation — beyond what the muscles can sustain,
or when their capacity is reduced by weakness, malnutrition, hypoxia,
hypoperfusion or electrolyte disturbance.
As the muscles fatigue, ventilation can no longer be maintained,
the carbon dioxide rises, and ventilatory failure ensues; a sign is a rapid,
shallow breathing pattern and the use of accessory muscles.
The hyperinflated patient is particularly vulnerable,
the diaphragm being mechanically disadvantaged.
Rest, by mechanical ventilation, allows recovery.
So respiratory muscle fatigue occurs when the load on the muscles exceeds their
capacity — from increased work or reduced strength,
energy supply or efficiency — leading to inability to sustain ventilation and to
ventilatory failure; signalled by rapid shallow breathing and accessory muscle use,
and relieved by ventilatory support, a key mechanism in respiratory failure.
Describe the larynx and its role in airway protection and phonation.
The larynx, situated at the junction of the pharynx and trachea,
is the organ guarding the entrance to the lower airway,
and it has three principal functions — protection of the airway,
the control of airflow, and phonation — all of direct relevance to anaesthesia.
Its framework of cartilages, chief among them the thyroid,
cricoid and the paired arytenoids, supports the vocal cords, and its muscles,
supplied by the vagus through the recurrent laryngeal and superior laryngeal
nerves, control the position and tension of the cords.
In protection, the larynx closes during swallowing,
the epiglottis and the cord closure preventing aspiration,
and it mediates the cough and the protective laryngeal reflexes.
In the control of airflow, the cords adjust the airway calibre.
In phonation, the expired air sets the adducted cords vibrating to produce voice.
Under anaesthesia the protective reflexes are obtunded, risking aspiration,
while light anaesthesia with airway stimulation may provoke laryngospasm;
damage to the recurrent laryngeal nerve impairs the cords.
So the larynx, framed by its cartilages and moved by the laryngeal muscles under
vagal control, protects the airway against aspiration, controls airflow,
and produces voice; its reflexes obtunded by anaesthesia,
risking aspiration and laryngospasm — making it central to airway management.
Describe the physiology of laryngospasm.
Laryngospasm is a sustained, reflex closure of the larynx by the adduction of the
vocal cords, an exaggeration of the normal protective glottic closure reflex,
and it is a feared complication of anaesthesia because it can completely obstruct
the airway.
It is a protective reflex, mediated by the superior laryngeal nerve,
intended to prevent the entry of material into the airway;
in laryngospasm this reflex becomes excessive and sustained,
the laryngeal muscles holding the cords,
and sometimes the false cords and surrounding tissues, tightly closed.
It is provoked by stimulation of the larynx or pharynx — by secretions, blood,
airway instrumentation, or surgical stimulation — particularly during the light
planes of anaesthesia, on induction or emergence,
when the reflexes are present but consciousness and coordinated control are not.
The result is partial or complete airway obstruction, with stridor or silence, and,
if unrelieved, hypoxia. It is managed by removing the stimulus,
applying continuous positive airway pressure with oxygen, deepening anaesthesia,
and, if needed, paralysis.
So laryngospasm is a sustained, exaggerated reflex adduction of the vocal cords,
mediated by the superior laryngeal nerve and provoked by airway stimulation in
light anaesthesia, causing airway obstruction and hypoxia;
managed by removing the stimulus, positive-pressure oxygen,
deepening anaesthesia and, if necessary,
muscle relaxation — a critical airway emergency.
Describe the effects of obesity on respiratory mechanics.
Obesity has marked and clinically important effects on respiratory mechanics,
loading the respiratory system and reducing its volumes,
which combine with the effects of anaesthesia to make the obese patient
particularly vulnerable.
The excess adipose tissue on the chest wall and within the abdomen imposes a
mechanical load: it reduces the compliance of the chest wall and,
by splinting the diaphragm, especially when supine,
reduces the compliance of the whole respiratory system,
increasing the work of breathing.
The functional residual capacity is reduced, often markedly,
by the upward displacement of the diaphragm and the loading of the chest,
and this reduction brings the functional residual capacity below the closing
capacity, so that airway closure and collapse occur during tidal breathing,
causing areas of low ventilation-perfusion ratio and shunt, and hypoxaemia.
The increased work of breathing raises the oxygen cost of breathing,
and the reduced functional residual capacity shortens the safe apnoea time.
These effects are all worsened by the supine position and anaesthesia.
So obesity reduces chest-wall and total compliance and increases the work of
breathing, and markedly reduces the functional residual capacity — often below the
closing capacity — causing airway closure, shunt and hypoxaemia,
with a shortened safe apnoea time; effects compounded by the supine position and
anaesthesia, making respiratory management of the obese patient a particular
challenge.
Describe the effects of pregnancy on respiratory mechanics and ventilation.
Pregnancy produces a series of changes in respiratory mechanics and ventilation,
driven by the enlarging uterus and by hormonal effects,
which together reduce the respiratory reserve and are important in the anaesthesia
of the pregnant patient.
Mechanically, the enlarging gravid uterus pushes the diaphragm upward,
reducing the functional residual capacity by around a fifth by term,
especially when supine; the chest wall adapts, with a widening of the rib cage,
so that the vital capacity is largely preserved,
but the reduced functional residual capacity may fall below the closing capacity,
causing airway closure.
At the same time, ventilation is increased: progesterone stimulates respiration,
increasing the tidal volume and so the alveolar ventilation,
producing a physiological hyperventilation with a lowered arterial carbon dioxide
and a compensated respiratory alkalosis.
Oxygen consumption is increased by the metabolic demands of the pregnancy.
The combination of a reduced functional residual capacity — a smaller oxygen store
— and an increased oxygen consumption greatly shortens the time to desaturation
during apnoea, so pre-oxygenation is especially important.
So pregnancy reduces the functional residual capacity through diaphragmatic
displacement while increasing alveolar ventilation through progesterone,
giving a compensated respiratory alkalosis, with raised oxygen consumption;
the reduced reserve and increased demand shortening the safe apnoea time — changes
central to obstetric anaesthesia.
How does the respiratory system of the neonate differ mechanically from the adult?
The neonate's respiratory system differs from the adult's in several mechanical and
anatomical respects that make the infant less able to tolerate respiratory
challenge, of importance in paediatric anaesthesia.
Mechanically, the infant's chest wall is highly compliant,
being cartilaginous and poorly ossified,
so it provides little outward recoil to oppose the lung's inward recoil;
as a result the functional residual capacity is relatively low and the chest wall
tends to collapse inward, and the infant maintains its lung volume partly by
dynamic means — a rapid respiratory rate and laryngeal braking.
The lungs themselves have fewer alveoli, still developing,
and the airways are smaller, so airway resistance is higher and more sensitive to
narrowing.
The diaphragm, the main muscle, has fewer fatigue-resistant fibres and is more
easily fatigued, and works at a mechanical disadvantage.
The oxygen consumption is high relative to the functional residual capacity,
so desaturation is rapid.
So the neonate has a highly compliant chest wall giving little recoil and a low
functional residual capacity, smaller and more resistant airways,
a fatigue-prone diaphragm, and a high oxygen consumption relative to its small
oxygen store — features causing rapid desaturation and limited reserve,
central to the conduct of neonatal anaesthesia.
Describe the regional gradient of intrapleural pressure down the lung.
The intrapleural pressure is not uniform over the surface of the lung but varies
from the top to the bottom, being more negative at the apex than at the base,
and this gradient is the basis of the uneven regional distribution of ventilation.
The gradient arises because the lung has weight and is, in effect,
suspended within the thorax: gravity tends to pull the lung downward,
so that at the apex the lung is more pulled away from the chest wall,
making the pleural pressure there more negative,
while at the base the weight of the lung above reduces the negativity,
making the pleural pressure less negative — in the upright lung the difference
amounting to several centimetres of water from apex to base.
The consequence, as discussed, is that the apical alveoli,
exposed to a more negative pressure,
are held more expanded and sit on the flatter part of the compliance curve,
while the basal alveoli are less expanded and sit on the steeper part,
so they ventilate more for a given pressure change.
So the intrapleural pressure is more negative at the apex than the base,
by several centimetres of water, because of the weight of the lung under gravity;
this gradient holds apical alveoli more expanded and basal alveoli less so,
placing the base on the steeper part of the compliance curve and accounting for the
greater ventilation of the base — a determinant of regional ventilation.
Thank you. A clear account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The respiratory system serves gas exchange plus non-respiratory functions,
arranged as a conducting zone (the anatomical dead space) and a respiratory zone of
alveoli (~70 m², thin blood-gas barrier) over ~23 branching generations with
rapidly increasing total cross-section.
2. Inspiration is active — chiefly the diaphragm (phrenic,
C3-5) with the external intercostals; quiet expiration is passive elastic recoil;
increased breathing recruits accessory inspiratory muscles and active abdominal
expiration.
The pleura couples lung to chest wall,
and the intrapleural pressure is normally negative (~-5 cmH2O,
more negative in inspiration) from their opposing recoils.
Second, A breath is driven by pressure gradients:
inspiration makes intrapleural pressure more negative,
lowering alveolar pressure to draw air in;
expiratory recoil raises alveolar pressure to expel it;
transpulmonary pressure (alveolar minus intrapleural) distends the lung.
Elastic recoil — the tendency to collapse — arises from elastic tissue and, mainly,
alveolar surface tension.
Third, By Laplace's law the alveolar collapsing pressure = 2 × surface tension ÷
radius, so smaller alveoli would empty into larger and the lung be unstable;
surfactant (chiefly DPPC, from type II pneumocytes) lowers surface tension — more
in smaller alveoli — increasing compliance,
stabilising alveoli and helping keep them dry.
Fourth, Respiratory mechanics is central to anaesthesia:
anaesthesia and the supine position reduce FRC and cause atelectasis,
agents and neuromuscular blockade abolish respiratory muscle activity (requiring
ventilatory support), and positive-pressure ventilation reverses the normal
pressures — understanding recoil, compliance and surface tension guides PEEP and
the management of pneumothorax and surfactant deficiency.
Thank you. That concludes the station.